
In this lesson, we will learn how to create a scene like the one on the home page of the Three.js Journey website. We are going to create a small landscape with a path leading to a magical portal with some objects along the way like fences, trees, rocks. When you are done, you will be able to use what you've learned to create rooms like the ones on Three.js Journey. Or anything else!

And, to make our scene look its best, we are going to use a technique called baking.

Baking 
00:39
When you do a render in a 3D software like Blender, it usually looks better than the model you import into Three.js, no matter how hard you try to get the exact same lighting and colors. This is because of the technique used while making the render.

Ray Tracing consists of casting multiple rays toward each pixel of the render. These rays start with the geometry we are rendering. Next, they test the direction of each light in the scene to see which part of the geometry is illuminated as well as to test whether the directions of the light bouncing off the geometry are colliding with other objects in the scene. Then, for each of these collisions, more rays are being cast as they bounce off other objects. And it goes on and on like this multiple times. All of the information collected by these collisions is then computed to define the final color of that pixel.

The goal is to simulate real-life lighting and enable visual effects like indirect lighting and soft shadows. As an example, if you place a red object close to a white object, you'll see the white object being tinted with red because rays are bouncing from the red surface to the white surface. In the same way, you'll see that the red object looks brighter when the surface is close to the white object.

This process results in a beautiful realistic render, but doing one render can take many minutes, even hours.

When we are doing renders with WebGL, we need to do it as fast as possible in order to get a good frame rate. We don't have the luxury to spend minutes on just one render. For this reason, rendering in WebGL uses cheaper techniques that don't look as good but at least keep a decent frame rate.

The idea of baking is that we save those Ray Tracing renders into textures that we then use in WebGL instead of using the classic render techniques provided by Three.js.

Here is an example of baked texture:



And here is the result in Three.js:

There is no light, no real-time shadows. It's just the texture you see in the above example being placed on the geometries.

This way, we will see the Ray Tracing renders directly on the Meshes, and it looks awesome. And when we move around the scene, the performance will be great because all we did was to display a texture on a geometry.

Unfortunately, there are some drawbacks:

We have to bake everything in the 3D software and it's a long process.
We have to load the textures and if you have a complex scene with a lot of objects, you're going to need a lot of textures. This is bad for loading but it can also result in a short freeze at the beginning of the experience because we need to load those textures into the GPU.
The lights aren't dynamic. We can't move the lights, and we can't change their intensity or color in real time. We have to do it in the 3D software and re-bake everything.
Choosing to use baking or not is up to you and the project. Keep in mind that you can still mix baked and non-baked materials but it's hard to keep a homogeneous result.

Process 
10:37
To create that baked scene, we need to go through multiple steps:

Create the scene in 3D software.
Optimize all the objects because we need clean geometries and only the surfaces we can see.
UV unwrap everything.
Bake the render into texture(s).
Export both the scene and the texture(s). If we do this, we are going to have just one big texture. But, we can have multiple textures if there are a lot of objects and we want better quality.
Import everything in Three.js and apply the texture on the mesh.
As a bonus, we will also add some details in Three.js to give more life to the scene like a cool portal effect with fireflies floating around.

Blender 
12:52
We are going to use Blender to create our scene, bake it, and export it.

If you don't know Blender yet, you should follow the previous lesson dedicated to it. Assuming you now know the basics of Blender, the following steps are going to be a little more direct. Nevertheless, each part will be explained. Take your time and make sure to get everything right before moving forward.

If you are familiar with Blender and concepts like UV unwrapping, you can try to diverge from the lesson and create your own scene. If you're not familiar, you should try to follow the steps exactly. Then, once the project is over, you can try on your own and create your dream scene.

In this lesson, I'll be using the 2.92.0 version of Blender, but you'll probably use a more recent version. Keep an eye on potential changes in the interface or in the shortcuts.

Setup 
14:44
To begin, we create a new Blender file. The default setup is the one we defined in the Blender lesson but you can use any setup you like. If you want the same setup, you can also use the portal.blend file in the starter:



A Point Light is already present in the scene with the following parameters.

If the parameters are different from yours, you might be using Eeevee as the Renderer Engine. You can change it now. We will be changing it anyway a little further down.



Start by deleting the default cube or any default object you have in the scene, but keep the light. Use X to delete objects.

You can now save the file. During the rest of the lesson, remember to save regularly.

Floor 
17:24
We are going to start with the floor.

Create a simple plane with Shift + A

Scale that plane so that it covers 4 units. You can look at the grid on the floor of the scene to see what 4 units looks like. Also, those units can be anything you want. Actually, you might see something like 4m because your Blender is configured to use meters. This doesn't matter because 4 units in Blender will result in 4 units in Three.js.

To do that, you can change its size in the small menu that shows up when creating it:



You can also scale it using S after you've created it (you can use CTRL to round the value):



Or you can go to the Edit Mode with TAB and then scale it the same way:



The result will actually be slightly different according to which technique you used. If you scale the object while not using the Edit Mode, you'll apply a transformation on the object itself and not on the geometry.

This might become a problem later but, later on, we are going to fix it anyway for every object. So use the technique you prefer.

Fences 
20:20
For the first objects in the scene, we can start with the fences. They are simple to create and will give some life to our scene.

We are going to create 2 flat boxes for the poles (posts) and 2 other flat and wide boxes for the planks (rails).

Create the first pole by making a cube with SHIFT + A. Go into Edit Mode with TAB and start scaling it:



If you don't get the exact shape at first, it's not a problem. You can always change it later.

Right now, we are in Edit Mode and we are going to stay in that mode for the rest of the fence. We can still create primitives and they will count as part of the same geometry. It's not mandatory but it might get handy to have only one geometry for each fence.

While in the Edit Mode, select the box (if that's not already the case) with A, duplicate it with SHIFT + D and move it to the side. You can press Y right after duplicating it to force the movement on the Y axis only:



Again, duplicate it with SHIFT + D, scale it with S and move it with G to create the two other planks:



Now that you have all the components of the fence, you can rearrange it any way you want. You can also center the whole geometry so that the origin (the small orange dot) is roughly at the bottom center of the fence:



Once you are happy with the result, leave the Edit Mode by pressing TAB:



You can now duplicate the fence to create 6 fences with SHIFT + D. Make sure you are in Object Mode and add some randomness to their position and rotation:



As always, don't spend too much time on positioning stuff. You can always do that later once you have all the objects.

First render 
27:15
Now that we have some stuff visible, we can try to do a first render. Even if the final goal is to export our scene into Three.js we want to see how it looks in Blender because the baking technique is supposed to get us the same result. It's also a good opportunity to create cool renders to share with the community or with your friends.

Camera
Create a camera with SHIFT + A:



While hovering over one of the 3D Viewport areas (bottom right in our case) and having the camera selected, press NUMPAD 0. This will position the camera so that you will see what it views in your viewport.

Select the camera from another 3D Viewport area and move it with G so that the scene fills the view:



You can now change the camera shading to Rendered buy pressing Z once, in order to show the Shading wheel:



You now have a preview of the final render that is seen by the camera:



By default, Blender is using the render engine Eevee. Eevee is a little like WebGL. It's really fast, it doesn't use Ray Tracing, but it also doesn't look as good as the other engine named Cycles.

While doing basic modeling for real-time purposes, it can be useful to use Eevee. But in our case, we want the best looking result, which is why we are going to switch to Cycles.

In the Properties area, go to the Render Properties tab and select Cycles as the Render Engine:



The camera preview should display a better looking result:



Quality
There are many parameters to control the quality but the most important one is Sampling.

Go to the same Render Properties tab again and look at the Sampling section:



The higher the value, the better, but also the longer it will take to do the render.

128 is a decent value, but you might see some artifacts which are like a visual noise in the render.
256 will look better and the noise shouldn't be too visible.
512 should be more than enough for a good looking result.
1024 to be sure of the quality, but only if your computer is performant enough. Otherwise, you may have to wait hours.
Obviously you can use any intermediate value like 200 or any other number, but I like to keep numbers that are a power of 2 (developer reflex).

For now, we will keep 128 for the Render and 32 for the Viewport.

Resolution
Another parameter is the output resolution.

You can access this property in the Output Properties tab:



Here you can change the width and height of the output image but also scale it in case you want to do a smaller render without having to calculate the width and height.

Let's use a classic resolution with 1920x1080 and no scale (100%).

First render
It's time to do our first render.

Press F12 to start rendering in a new window. Wait a little while and you'll see the result appearing square by square:



Once the render is done and while the render window is still open, press ALT + S to save the image.

Here you can choose the image format, where to save it, and the quality:



This part is up to you and depends on the image quality you want.



Tree trunks 
36:16
Let's continue our scene and create some tree trunks.

Because we want to create a low poly style, we will create some cylinders with only 10 sides.

Create a Cylinder with SHIFT + A and, in the creation menu that should appear on the bottom left, choose 10 vertices:



Move the trunk to the side closest to the camera with G and resize it to match the fences' scale with S:



Duplicate it with SHIFT + D and create a bunch of other trunks with different heights.

You can transform the geometry itself by moving the top face of the cylinder on the Z axis or you can scale it.

Make sure they don't float above the ground. These are not magic trunks:



A little later, we are going to create an axe stuck in one of those trunks. We can create some split logs on the ground now to show what the axe has done.

Start by creating a cylinder again, but this time, in the creation window, choose Triangle Fan as the Cap Fill Type.

If you switch to the Wireframe shading, you'll see that the top and bottom parts of the cylinder are now triangles:



This will enable us to remove the parts we don't need and end up with only a cut of the cylinder.

Select the log, go to Edit Mode with tab and remove the parts of the log you don't want. In our case, we can keep 2 portions of it. Press X to remove the faces you selected.

Take your time, remove part by part. Undo if you did something wrong:



It's a good start but we are missing faces.

While you are in Edit Mode, switch to vertex select:



Now select all the 4 vertices of the face you want to create:



And press F to create a new face out of those 4 vertices:



Do the same for the other side. You should get a good-looking split log:



Resize the log, leave the Edit Mode and duplicate it a bunch of times while spreading them on the floor around the trunks:



Organizing 
48:38
Currently, we are creating objects without taking care of how we structure our scene.

As with everything, it's good to organize things a little.

In Blender, we have something called Collections. You can see that they are like folders in which you can put objects. Be aware that they don't act like Three.js groups which you can scale and all the objects inside will scale as well. It's more like an easy way to organize your objects.

We could have used a more classic grouping solution by using Blender's parent system, but doing so might create a complex scene graph that might break our code in later lessons. If possible, try to keep a scene graph as flat as possible.

In the Outliner area, you can see that we have already two collections:



The Scene Collection is the main one. You can't do much with it.

The Collection, is the default one in which all objects are added by default. You can rename it and you can also deactivate it using the checkbox on its right:



This will hide the objects both in the viewport and in the render.

You can have more control over it by adding other buttons. To do that, click on the Filter button on the top right corner of the Outliner:



Then activate the following buttons:



With the arrow icon, we can now make a collection unselectable but still visible.

We are not going to rename the objects just now. Instead, we are going to create collections and put the objects in them.

To create a new collection, you can right click on an empty part of the Outliner, choose New Collection and then write the name you want.



Or you can select the object you want in the scene, press M, and choose New Collection (or choose an existing collection):



Organize your Outliner like below, and make the others collection unselectable:



From now on, we will organize all objects into collections.

You can also add collections inside other collections.

Collections are also useful to select every object it contains. Right click on the collection and choose Select Objects:



Axe 
53:33
Let's create a small but more difficult part of the scene, the axe.

We don't need to make it at the right scale for now. That way, we can work on much bigger shapes.

We are going to start with the head of the axe.

Head
Start with a flat cube:



Go in Edit Mode and add some loop cuts with CTRL + R (when loop cutting, use the WHEEL to add more loops):



Move the vertices to round the bottom part and shrink the top part. How you do this step is up to you and the shape you want to achieve, but try to keep a symmetrical shape. Select the vertices you want to change and play with G to move them and S to scale them. Don't forget that you can force an axis by pressing X, Y or Z after starting a transformation:



Add a loop cut in the slice (CTRL + R):



Select the following vertices:



Move them up along the edges by pressing G twice to move them along their edges:



We have our axe head. Don't forget to put it in a collection:



Handle
We can now create the handle.

Start with a box going through the axe head:



Add some curve by creating loop cuts with CTRL + R in Edit Mode and moving the vertices. You can also extend the tip of the handle by selecting the face and pressing E to extrude it:



Resize and place the axe on one of the trunks and don't forget to put the handle in the axe collection:



Pole lights 
01:04:45
For the pole lights, use the same techniques as before. You should be able to handle this yourself.

Don't forget to put everything in a poleLights collection.

Create the base:



Add beams:



Add the rope that will hold the lamp:



Add the lamp itself:



We want to create recesses in the sides of that lamp.

In Edit Mode select the 4 sides of the lamp as well as the one below:



Press I to create an inset and LEFT CLICK immediately without moving your cursor:



By doing so, we created an inset but with the wrong offset because we didn't move the mouse before clicking. But as you can see, we can still change the parameters of the inset with the menu that opened in the bottom left corner.

Check Individual and play with the Thickness value. Make sure that the outer frame is big enough or you might have a problem later:



We now want to push those faces inside. We are going to do an extrude, but first, change the Transform Pivot Point to Individual Origins:



This way, the extrude will be applied on each face independently.

Press E and, as with the inset, LEFT CLICK immediately in order to play with the extrude parameters using the menu that should appear in the bottom left corner.

Set the Orientation to Normal and play with the Z value:



You can set the Transform Pivot Point back to to Bounding Box Center:



That's a good-looking light, but we also need to separate those faces from the frame. This will get handy later.

Make sure the inside faces are still selected while in Edit Mode and press P to open the separation menu. Choose Selection:



You should have two different objects for the light. One for the frame and one for the faces that will cast the light later.

Select the entire pole light and duplicate it, but this time using the ALT + D instead of SHIFT + D. Place it on the other side:



This will create a Linked Duplicate. By doing that, editing one geometry will automatically edit all the linked geometries. This way, it's easier to keep those two pole lights identical.

Now would be a good time to save and do a render (F12).



Rocks 
01:22:53
The rocks are a little bit tricky but fun to make. We are going to start with cubes and slice them randomly.

Make a rocks collection and create one cube inside:



We are now going to slice that cube.

Go in Edit Mode and select all the faces (if that's not already the case).

To slice the cube, we can use the Bisect tool. Unfortunately, this tool is a little bit hard to find.

You can access it using the Tools menu on the left by holding LEFT CLICK on the icon as shown below and choosing Bisect (if you can't see the left menu, press T):



You can also access it in the Mesh menu on the top of the 3D Viewport:



Or you can press F3 and search for Bisect:



You'll have to do this every time you want to cut your cube.

Now that the Bisect is active, click and drag through the cube to create a cut:



With the bottom left menu, you can choose to clear one side of the cube with Clear Outer and to fill the hole it created with Fill:



There you go, you did your first clean cut.

Select all the faces again with A and repeat the process with random angles. Try to break the squareness of the initial shape and repeat the process for a bunch of other cubes.

Do not try to refine the vertices. You might break the flatness of the faces.

You should also try to keep the origin of the geometry on the floor. This will get handy if we want to scale them.

As always, take your time and don't spend to much time on details.

Do that for 3 or 4 cubes:



Now that you have a bunch of rocks, duplicate / scale / rotate and move them all around the scene. It's time to fill the emptiness. Don't be afraid to re-use the same rocks. People won't notice it and if they do, they'll think it's funny.

Add more big rocks in the back to create some height without blocking the view. Use small rocks in the front to add details:



Portal 
01:35:43
It's time to add the main component of the scene, the portal.

We are going to start with the bricks positioned in a circle.

Create a portal collections and add your first brick to it:



Then, go to Edit Mode and move the brick geometry down so that its origin is way above:



Leave the Edit Mode and duplicate the brick using ALT + D to create a Linked Duplicate (like we did for the pole light) and while still in the duplicate mode rotate it on the Y axis.

It's very important to do the rotation before validating the duplicate:



We are going to repeat the operation. To do that, press F3 and search for repeat last:



This will re-do the last action (which was the duplicate) and because we also did the rotation in that duplication, the new brick will also rotate. Do that multiple times until you get an almost full circle and if the rotation goes in the wrong direction, it's okay, we can duplicate extra bricks:



If those steps are too hard, simply duplicate the brick using ALT + D (not SHIFT + D) and place them manually.

Rotate the whole thing so that the open part is at the bottom:



Select one of the bricks (if possible one aligned with the scene like the one on the top) and go into Edit Mode:



As you can see, all the bricks look like they are being edited. This is because they are linked duplicates and editing one will edit the others.

Move the vertices so that the bricks don't overlap anymore:



Leave the Edit Mode, scale and move the whole portal to the back and slightly above the floor:



Add some stairs with boxes and don't forget to put everything in a collection named portal:



We need to fill that portal.

Create a circle and make sure the Fill Type is on Triangle Fan:



Move it to the center of the portal. It doesn't have to be perfect, as long as the disc covers the hole and it doesn't overflow.

To rotate it to a perfect 90-degree angle, press X once (or Y depending on your scene) when doing the rotation to force the axis. You can also press CTRL while moving the mouse to round the value:



And that's it for the modeling part.

Now that you have all the elements, you can improve the general setup, move objects, center the camera, move the light, etc.

Make sure that every object is properly organized in collections and don't forget to save.



Materials 
01:48:08
It's time to add some color to the scene.

First, make sure that the lights you have in the scene are white and that the intensity is strong enough. This way, you'll be able to appreciate the colors in a neutral environment. We will apply some changes to the lights later.

You should also change the main 3D Viewport to Material Preview shading (by pressing Z) or even Renderer shading to really see what you are doing:



Grass
Select the floor. In the Properties area, go to the Materials Properties tab and add a material with the new button:



You can rename that material grass at the top of the material section:



Then you can play with the different properties. For the style we want, you can simply change the Base Color and set the Roughness to the maximum:



Finding the right color is up to you, but don't spend too much time on it. You need to see the overall scene with all the colors before tweaking.

Wood
Now select one of the trunks and create a new material named wood.

By the way, you might already have default materials in your scene. Usually, the default material created with the scene is named Material. You can use that material and change its name if you don't like to have unused stuff hanging around:



To apply this material to all other wood objects in the scene, instead of changing them one by one, you can select them by right clicking on the collection and choose Select objects:



This will select all the objects in the collection:



Make sure that the one with the material is the active one (with a brighter outline). You can use SHIFT + LEFT CLICK to change the active one:



You can now press CTRL + L to open a menu in which you can choose what you want to apply from the active object to all the selected objects. Here, we want to apply the Materials:



All the selected objects should have the wood material:



We can do the same with the fences.

Select all the fences.
Select one of the trunks.
Make sure the trunk is the active object.
Press CTRL + L and choose Materials.
All the fences should have the wood material applied:



Repeat the steps for the wood part of the pole lights and also the axe handle:



Rocks
Select a rock and create a rock material:



And then apply this rock material to all rocky materials (the rocks, the portal bricks, the portal stairs and the pole light bases):



Metal
The lamp frames can be made of a darker metal.

Select one of them and apply a material named metal:



The other lamp frames will automatically get the same material because they are linked.

Apply the same metal material to the axe head:



Emissive lights 
01:57:16
We want the portal and the lamp to emit lights. This is possible with a type of material named Emission.

Pole lights
Select one of the lamp lights (the faces inside) and create a new material. Name it poleLightEmission and instead of a Principled BSDF, choose Emission for the Surface property:



This kind of material will emit light.

Change its Color to a warmer one and increase the Strength to something like 80:



Portal
Create another Emission material named portalEmission. Set the Strength to something like 40 and use the color you want (we can change those later):



We can't see much of the light, but if you remove the all other lights you have in the scene, you'll see that it's working pretty well:



Ambient lighting 
02:00:05
One final touch we can add is an ambient lighting to control the general illumination of the scene.

If you haven't done so yet, delete all the lights in the scene.

Then, create an Area Light, scale it up, move it to the left of the scene and make sure that the perpendicular stroke going out of the light is targeting the middle of the scene:



Add it to the others collection.

An Area Light is a rectangular plane that creates a diffuse light. The bigger the plane, the more diffuse. This will help create an ambiance but also diffuse the shadows for a smoother result.

Increase the Power of the light to something like 240 and change the Color:



Final tweaks 
02:02:22
Now is a good time to tweak the colors and lighting. Here, with the orange Area Light, we went for a rising sun effect:



But if we reduce the light of the portal, change the color of the Area Light to a blue, and tweak the colors of the objects in the scene, we can create a night effect:



You can also tweak the portal color:





Choose the settings you like most. What we will be doing in the rest of the lessons will still work.

Final render 
02:03:10
That's it for the creation part. In the next lesson, we will learn how to optimize, bake, and export everything.

In the mean time, you can create and share your work. To improve your renders, don't forget to increase the sampling in the Render properties tab. Somewhere between 512 and 1024 should be more than enough:



In the same section, you can also get rid of the visual noise by checking the Denoise property and choosing NLM:


Introduction 
00:00
We created a scene that looks good when doing a render, but our final goal is to export it to Three.js.

We need to optimize it, but also to bake it. If you remember from the previous lesson, baking consists of saving the good-looking render result into a texture that we will then place on the geometry in Three.js. Because of that, we need to UV unwrap our scene.

Setup 
00:39
You can start from the blender file you made in the previous lesson, or you can get the same file as is in that lesson by using the starter file.

Optimization 
01:21
Removing hidden faces
The first thing we need to do is remove all the hidden faces. That would mean faces directly on the floor like the bottom of the trunks. And, it would also mean faces against other faces like the back of the stair steps.

In order to see the faces more clearly, we can switch between the Wireframe and the Solid shadings:



Trunks
We are going to start with the trunks.

You can deactivate the collections you are not working on at the moment by unchecking them in the Outliner:



To optimize the trunks and logs:

Select all of them.
Go into Edit Mode.
Switch to the face selection.
Select all the faces as shown below and delete them with X.


You should get something like this:



Fences
Repeat the process with the fences:



Pole lights
Repeat the process with the pole lights. You only need to do one of the pole lights because they are linked duplicates.

Don't forget to delete the bottom cap of the main beam and the caps of the rope:



Rocks
Repeat the process with the rocks:



Though it isn't mandatory, if some rocks are overflowing into the ground, you can fix that with the bissect tool we used in the previous lesson. Select all the faces in Edit Mode, press F3 and search for bissect. Then slice the overflowing parts of the rocks you want to cut out.

Portal
For the portal, most of the optimization concerns the stairs.

You can start by resizing them so that they don't overlap too much:



Then you can remove the bottom faces but also the hidden faces between the steps:



If you did the previous lessons exactly as I said, and you now try to remove the faces of the bricks inside the stairs, you will see that you can't do it without editing all the bricks at the same time because they are linked duplicates.

If you didn't use linked duplicates, you shouldn't have this problem, but we are going to make sure that none of the objects in the scene are linked duplicates anyway.

Unlink duplicates
We need to unlink the duplicates in order to fix the bricks, as well as for the next step, which will consist of unwrapping the geometries. If we were to keep the links, both pole lights would be unwrapped on the same coordinates. This would result in the baking being done twice in the same position of the texture.

To unlink the duplicates, go into Object Mode and select all objects with A. Even if we are only concerned with the portal bricks and the pole lights, the action we are taking can be applied to the whole scene without consequences.

While all the objects are selected, press F3 and search for make single. Then choose Make Single User > Object & Data:



All previously linked duplicates are now unlinked and we can edit the bricks that overlap the stairs without changing all the bricks.

Remove the faces of the bricks inside the stairs:



Check the whole scene and make sure that you are done with removing the hidden faces.

Forgetting some isn't a big issue and you can still remove them later. But once we start unwrapping the geometries, removing faces at that time might have some consequences.

Fixing faces orientation
One issue we can't see has to do with the orientation of faces. All faces have a front and a back. While this isn't a problem when doing a render, it might create bugs during the baking process and some of the faces might become black. Those faces won't even be rendered in Three.js because, by default, back sides are hidden.

As you might have guessed, this orientation is a matter of normals. When doing extrudes, insets, and other operations like that, we might have flipped the normals unintentionally.

First, we need a way to see the faces orientation. While in Object Mode, in the top right corner of the Blender Viewport 3D, click on the following icon:



On the menu which should open, check Face Orientation:



You should now see blue faces when the orientation is good and red faces when the orientation is wrong:



In this case only the pole lights are wrong, but you might have a very different result with your model.

If everything is already blue, congratulations, you can skip this step.

To fix the red faces:

Select the object you want to fix.
Go into Edit Mode.
Select the faces you want to flip.
Press F3, search for flip and choose Mesh > Normals > Flip.


Once the whole scene is blue, you can uncheck the Face Orientation and continue:



Normalize scales
Another problem is with scaling.

Some objects have been scaled in Edit Mode, meaning that we are scaling the geometry and not the object itself. Some other objects have been scaled in Object Mode, meaning that there is a transformation on the object but not on the geometry itself.

Again, while doing renders, it's not really important. But it might create issues when doing the UV unwrapping.

Later in the lesson, we are going to use automatic UV unwrapping and Blender will take into account the geometry size but not the object scale. This might result in some objects taking more space or not as much space as they should. For example, you might end up with the axe taking only half of the texture because the geometry is still huge even though we reduced the object scale.

To fix that, we need to normalize all the scales.

In Object Mode, select all the objects with A , press CTRL + A to open the Apply menu and choose Scale:



You can't see a difference, but all of the object scales have been applied to their geometries instead. This way, all our objects now have a scale of 1.

We are done with the optimization and we can start to UV unwrap our scene.

Don't forget to save.

UV unwrapping 
26:08
The idea is to unfold all the geometry composing our scene into a square. Later, this will enable us to bake the render into a texture that will follow the unwrapping we set.

The scene:



The unfold scene:



There are multiple ways of unwrapping a geometry. We can use a "smart" automatic version that will do a pretty good job. Or, we can do a manual version to create a more optimized version, but at the price of more effort.

We are going to do a mix of both techniques depending on the objects.

First, we can change the bottom right area to UV Editor:



The UV Editor displays a square that represents our unfold. We need to make everything fit inside that square. We could have used multiple textures, which would mean independent UV unwraps, but our scene isn't that complex or big.

Floor
Let's start by unwrapping the easiest element, the floor.

Select the floor.
Go into Edit Mode.
Select the whole geometry with A.


As you can see in the UV Editor, the plane is already unwrapped and takes the whole UV. By default, Blender generates UV coordinates for most of the primitives. This is good, and we can simply move that square to a corner of the UV map.

To edit the UV, the shortcuts are almost the same as editing an object. While hovering the UV Editor area, press A to select everything, S to scale it and G to move it:



Don't spend too much time on placing it exactly. In the end, we will reorganize things.

Fences
Let's try a more difficult shape and unwrap the fences.

Select one of the fences.
Go into Edit Mode.
Select all the faces with A.


As you can see, the geometry is already unwrapped, but the 4 boxes that compose our fence are stacked one above the other and in a cross shape that doesn't match the proportions of our geometry. This is the default UV unwrap of a cube. We need to unwrap it ourselves.

We are going to focus on one of the poles of the fence first. To select a pole, click on one of the faces:

Press CTRL + L and all the other faces of the pole should now be selected (make sure that Seam is active on the menu which should open in the bottom left of the area:



This technique is very useful to select what we call islands. An island is a group of faces that are connected together.

To unwrap the pole, press U and choose Unwrap:



Unfortunately, this isn't a good unwrap:



And this is because we didn't provide information on how to "cut" the geometry.

If you try to unfold a cube without cutting some of the edges, you'll end up with a mess. Those cuts are called seams.

To create a seam, go into Edge selection and select the edges you want to be cut when unwrapped:



Press U and choose Mark seam:



If you unselect everything, you'll see that those seams are now in red:



If your seams are fine, don't touch them, but be aware that you can remove them if you need to. To do that (and don't, if you don't need to), select the concerned edge, press U and choose Clear Seam:



Finding where to cut the geometry can be very hard. You'll have to anticipate the result and try until it works. Just make sure that the faces aren't distorted.

Select the whole pole again (select one part and press CTRL + L to select the whole island), press U and choose Unwrap to unwrap it again:



As you can see, this unwrap is much better.

Let's do the same with the other pole. Select the same edges, press U and choose Mark Seam:



Then select the whole pole, press U and choose Unwrap:



You should get the same result. The unwraps of the two poles are overlapping but we will fix that later. For now, we should only focus on setting the seams right.

Cut one of the planks the same way:



Unwrap it:



And this time, instead of doing the same thing for the other plank, simply remove the bottom one, duplicate the top (already unwrapped) one and place it where the bottom one was:



This is just a way to gain some time.

Now that all the different parts of the fence are well cut with seams, select all the geometry, press U and do the unwrap again:



The unwrap is looking great, unfortunately the island are way too close to each other. This will be an issue when we will bake because the baking will overflow a little. We need to move them apart.

When you choose Unwrap, a small menu appears on the bottom left of the area (if you lost that menu, unwrap again):



Here, you can change the Margin. Increase it a little to something like 0.15:



As you can see, the islands are now slightly separated.

Before moving those UV coordinates somewhere in the map, we need to handle the other fences.

Instead of cutting and unwrapping all of the fences, we can simply remove the previous ones and duplicate the unwrapped one at its positions. Don't spend too much time positioning at the exact same position.

In Object Mode, duplicate the unwrapped fence with SHIFT + D and replace the others.

Now select all the fences, go in Edit Mode, select all the faces and unwrap them again, but this time, all together.

You should change the Margin to something like 0.065:



(You might have noticed that there are more islands in the above screenshot. This is due to an error in which I duplicated one of the fences at the same place. Ignore this.)

Put those unwraps in a corner of the UV map:



Again, the exact position isn't important and we will reorganize everything later.

Separating the Emission material
We are going to repeat the whole process for the pole lights, but before doing so, we need to separate the objects that emit lights.

We are doing this because we don't want to bake those objects. In the end, they are uniform colors and we are going to create materials within Three.js to give them those colors.

We could have baked those objects, but it's a waste of space in the texture.

Create a emissions collection and put the two lamps and the portal (only the emission part) in it:



Make this collection unselectable so that we don't select them while doing the baking:



Pole lights
We can now unwrap the pole lights.

As with the fences, start with only one and, once you are happy, duplicate it and put it in place of the other pole light.

To help you focus on the object you want to unwrap, you can select it and press / on the numpad. This will isolate it:



If you want to leave that isolation, press / again.

You can try the unwrap on your own. Take your time, it's a long process. But with time, you'll be able to do it fast and efficiently.

You'll probably get a different result than in the lesson and that's totally normal. There are so many different ways of unwrapping and we don't really know if we are doing mistakes yet. Just do your best and don't hesitate to create too many cuts.

Here is how I did it:



The lamp frame is especially hard to cut. Here, I decided to make only one cut that goes from the bottom up. This is not always a good idea because, as you can see, it creates some distortion once you unwrap it:



But it's not that bad and at least we minimize the number of islands.

The unwrap looks like this:



Before reorganizing the islands, we can duplicate the pole in place of the other one and unwrap both of them together:



Since the islands are curvy, Blender doesn't do a great job placing them. Optimize the placement a little bit and put them in another corner of the UV map. Always make sure to leave some space between them:



Portal
Apply the same process for the portal. Isolate each object, add the seams, test the result by unwrapping and once you're done with all the parts of the portal, select them all and unwrap everything.

Here is the stair:



Here are the bricks:



And here is the whole portal:



Rocks
Do not worry, we are not going to cut them ourselves. Even if we did, it would have taken ages and we would have ended up with distorted unwraps. Instead, we are going to use an automatic "smart" unwrap.

Select all the rocks.
Go into Edit Mode.
Select all the faces.
Press U and choose Smart UV Project.


Validate the window that should open (we get access to the same parameters right after):



And here is your automatic unwrap:



Increase the Islands Margin to something like 0.025 to make some space between the islands.

Unfortunately, we already used all the corners of our map. For now, let's move the unwraps out of the map. This isn't a problem because, in the end, we will reorganize everything.



As you can see, automatic unwraps are decent. We could have used this technique for the whole scene. But, doing it on our own let us optimize things a bit more by minimizing the number of islands and reducing the seams. It's also a good way to keep the different groups of islands separated. This might get handy if we decide to remove an object. We will get the full area available for more unwrapping.

Trunks, logs and axe
Cut the trunks. Don't forget to also add a cut for the ring all around each trunk.



Cut the logs:



Cut the axe:



Unwrap them all (trunks, logs and axe) at once and place them somewhere outside of the UV map:



Reorganizing
That's it, we've unwrapped the whole scene.

Currently, however, the groups of islands are spread all around the UV map and even outside of it.

Select all the unwrap objects (not the emissions objects). Then, go into Edit Mode and select all the faces to get a preview of the current UV unwrap:



If you don't have this or if you have overlapping unwraps, try to figure out which object is the problem and fix it. You might also have forgotten some objects.

Before trying to make everything fit inside the UV map, we need to make sure that the proportions are the same between the different groups. We don't want an object to take a smaller or bigger space than it really needs.

Use the following icon on the top right part of the UV Editor (if you can't see it, enlarge the area):



In the menu that should open, check Display Stretch and change it to Area:



For some older versions of Blender, this option might be located in a different place. If you have a Display button on the top right corner, open it and you should find a stretch or stretching checkbox. If you don't have any of those, open the sidebar with N (if not already open) and go to the view tab to find the checkbox.

You'll now know if the area taken by an island is bigger or smaller than the others by using the colors:



Scale the different parts until everything has a similar color. The color might be different from mine.



It's now time to make everything fit in the UV map. One very important step here is to listen to the Tetris music theme at the same time.



Few tips:

Start by placing the groups in a rough square shape without looking at the UV map limits. Then resize the whole thing to make it fit in the UV map.
Keep some space between the islands.
You can scale some islands up to have a better quality for them in the final texture. It's good practice to do that for big surface or surfaces that the camera can see from up close. In our case, we can make the floor a little bit bigger.
If you have some room left, keep it. It might become useful if you forgot an object or if you want to add one.
The groups don't have to fit in perfect rectangles. Usually, I use one group with a lot of small islands like the rocks to fill the holes.
Once you're happy with the result, you can deactivate the Display Stretch:



Baking 
01:29:30
Now that our scene is nicely unwrapped, we can start to bake it.

Creating the texture
First we need to create a texture in Blender and we can use the UV Editor area to manage that image.

Leave the Edit Mode. On the top of the area, you should have a + New button:



Click on it to open the New Image menu:



Use the following parameters:

Name
Use baked.

It could be anything, but we are going to have only one texture and it's going to contain the "baked" texture.

Width and Height
Use 4096.

We use a power of 2 size because this texture will be used in Three.js. 4096 is a lot but we want a good quality. 8192 textures might not work for every browser.

Color
Use a white color.

This isn't that important but, in Three.js, when looking at the model from specific angles, the mip mapping might let that color appear on edges of the geometry. A white tint will look like a reflection and users won't notice it.

Alpha
Unchecked.

We don't need alpha in our texture.

Generated Type
Use Blank.

We want the initial texture to be the color we chose right above. The other options create grids that can be used to see how the texture looks on the geometry, but we don't need that.

32-bit Float
Checked.

This is a very important part that we will explain a bit later.

Tiled
Unchecked.

We don't need the texture to repeat itself.

Here is the final setup:



Validate it and the background of your UV map should now use that image. Zoom out if you can't see the edges of your map:



Be aware, that you can show any texture as the background of the UV Editor. The goal here is to help you see both the UV Mapping and the texture at the same time.

Saving the texture
Before baking anything in the texture, we are going to save it somewhere. This is actually not mandatory and textures can live inside the Blender file without being available as a separate file.

You might think that we have to save it in a file because we want to use it later in WebGL, but this texture is actually not the texture we are going to use.

If you remember, we chose to check 32-bit float. This made the texture data much more precise than a classic texture. In a way, we made an HDR texture. The problem with HDR textures is that they are way too heavy.

The question is, why do we need this HDR texture? We will answer that question later. For now, we are baking our scene inside a HDR texture in order to keep all the data.

Still, for the purpose of this lesson, we want to save the image in a separate file. On the top of the UV Editor area go into Image > Save As:



A saving window should open. Choose Radiance HDR as the File Format and change the name to baked.hdr. Make sure to save in the same folder as your .blend file:



We chose Radiance HDR as the File Format but some other formats can support high precision textures like OpenEXR However, the file is going to be huge.

If you open the right menu of the UV Editor (press N while hovering the area) in the Image tab, you should see that the texture is now the baked.hdr file in the same folder:



If you want to share your .blend file or move it in another folder, you'll have to keep the baked.hdr file with it.

Preparing the materials
We are almost ready to bake. Because we can have multiple textures in our project, we need a way to tell Blender that the texture we created is the one in which each object has to be baked. This information has to be provided on each material.

We can start with the floor.

Select the floor.

To define in which texture the material should be baked, we need to use the Shader Editor . Take one of the areas (or create a new one) on your layout and change it to Shader Editor:



This will be a Shader Editor for the grass material and it uses nodes. We won't go into details about nodes because we only need to create one and then make it active.



If you can't see these two nodes, make sure Use Nodes on the top part of the area is checked:



Also make sure that you selected the floor and that the grass material is applied to it.

To create a new node, press SHIFT + A while hovering the Shader Editor area:



Here, you can navigate to Texture > Image Texture



This is an Image Texture node:



Click on the drop-down image icon and choose our baked texture:



And that's it. Our material now knows it's supposed to bake itself inside the baked texture. We don't need to link that node to another node. We just need it to be here.

Make sure that this texture node is selected (it should have a white outline).

If you have multiple texture nodes in your shader, the active one will be the one used for baking.



Also, we leave the Color Space as linear. This might sound strange because we learned that sRGB enables better color management, but don't forget that this is still an HDR texture and we are not going to use it directly in the WebGL.

Baking the floor
It's finally time to do our first bake.

First of all,

While the floor is still selected, in the Properties area, go to the Render Properties tab and then in the Bake section:



If you can't see this section, you are probably using Eevee. Change the Render Engine to Cycles.

The Bake button will start the baking process. Don’t click on it yet because we need to tweak some parameters.

The Bake Type menu lets us choose what we want to bake. For example, this is where we could have created an Ambient Occlusion texture. Leave it on Combined in order to bake everything.



The View From will decide where the camera should be when rendering each surface. This can have quite a huge impact on reflection. In our case, we can’t see much reflection because of the roughness of the materials, yet, we want something as close as the render we made earlier so we are going to go for Active Camera.



The Margin property lets us control how much the baking will overflow from the area it is supposed to fill. We can keep 16 px for now. If we see that the baked islands are overlapping on their neighbors, we can reduce the margin.

Still in Margin, the Type property will decide if the margin will contain the pixels of the adjacent face or extend the existing face. Let’s use Extend which usually result in cleaner edges once used in WebGL.



The Clear Image property will erase the current image in the texture each time we do a bake. Because we are not going to do all the baking at once, uncheck it.



Before we can bake, we have to choose a Sampling quality. Scroll up to the Sampling > Render section.

Set the Samples to 128 which might sound low, but it’s quite a huge texture and we don’t want to wait hours for the render to finish.

Also deactivate the Denoise because we are going to apply it later on the final baked texture. Keeping it checked might result in visual artefacts for some Blender versions.



Make sure you selected only the floor and that the Texture node is active. Now, hit the Bake button and wait.



You can see the progress at the bottom of Blender:



The floor is the biggest and longest part to render, but if you want to accelerate the process, you can change the Sampling to 128 and it should look good enough.

Here is your floor baked onto the texture:



If the baking has ended, but you can't see the result in the texture, it might be a Blender bug. Do not worry, the process probably worked alright. Save the image with ALT + S while hovering the UV Editor area. Then, click on the refresh button you can find in the menu on the right of that same area (press N to toggle the menu):



Even if the baking worked, now is a good time to save the image. Since the image is a separate file in Blender, you have to save the image independently. If you try to leave Blender with an unsaved image, do not worry, Blender will alert you.

To save the image, while hovering in the UV Editor area, press ALT + S.

Baking the other objects
We can now repeat the process for the other objects. Let's start with the fences.

Select the fences:



Add the same Image Texture node and change it to the baked texture. Also make sure that the node is active:



Click the Bake button and wait:

You can continue like this with all the objects in the scene.

If you try to bake the trunks, the axe handle or the logs, you'll see that the texture is already set in the Shader Editor nodes. It's because they are sharing the same material.

You can try to bake multiple objects at once, as long as the texture node is set for all concerned materials.

Here is the final baked texture:



Don't forget to save both the .blend file and the image.

Troubleshooting
If you see some parts overlapping, select the object, go into Edit Mode, select all the faces and start moving the UV mapping to separate the islands a little. Then do the baking process of those parts again.

If some islands look unusually black, you might have flipped their normals accidentally. You need to locate them and flip them back.

Display the normal orientation like we did previously.
Locate the problematic ones (they should be red).
Select the object and go into Edit Mode.
Select the red faces.
Press F3, search for flip and choose Mesh > Normals > Flip.
You can bake them on top of the previous bake.

Exporting the image 
01:54:22
The color issue
As you can see, the colors are all burned out. If you compare to the render, the colors will have less contrast and look like this:



It's as if they are being toned in the render and that's exactly the case. When you do a render in Blender, a color manager is used. The default is Filmic (or AgX since the version 4 of Blender).

AgX is considered as the new standard and the main difference with Filmic is how it handles over-exposed areas, but it doesn’t mean you have to use this one specifically.

More info about AgX support in Blender here: https://developer.blender.org/docs/release_notes/4.0/color_management/

You can find it at the bottom of the Render Properties tab in the Color Management section:



If you want to test a render without any color manager, change the View Transform to Standard and do a render with F12:



As you can see, we have the same ugly colors with high contrast.

This tells us that, when baking in Blender, we are losing Filmic.

The noise issue
Another problem is the visual noise. When you do a render and if you have checked the denoise parameter, you can see a smooth render without noise.

When baking, the noise is back:



As with the color management, Blender seems to ignore the denoise parameter.

The image type issue
Finally, we want to export a compressed image that we can use in Three.js. We want it to be light and because we don't need transparency, we can use JPEG. Also, we want to apply the sRGB encoding to improve the color quality.

But currently, all we have is our fancy HDR image.

The solution
All of these problems can be fixed with the Blender Compositor.

The Compositor can be accessed within an area. Change one of the current areas (or create a new one) and choose Compositor:



The compositor uses nodes and, by default, your should have a Render Layers node and a Composite node:



To tell Blender to use those nodes when rendering, make sure to check the Use Nodes on top of the Compositor area:



The idea, here, is to create some nodes that will take our texture, apply a denoise on it and then apply Filmic. Then we output that texture to the render by sending it to the Composite node.

Start by creating an Image node with SHIFT + A:



Change the image to our baked, using the dropdown menu:



Normally, you should see your texture in the node preview, but this feature sometimes has bugs. Save everything and reopen it if you want to see the preview:



Now create a Denoise node to the right of the Image node:



Keep the default parameters:



Link the Image output of the Image node to the Image input of the Denoise node:



Link this Denoise output to the Composite input:



But where is the color management? you might ask.

Filmic (or AgX) will automatically be applied as long as you have set it in the parameters of the render:



Doing the compositing is like doing a render. But we don't want to render the scene, we want to render our image through the nodes we created. To deactivate the default render of the scene, select the Render Layers and press M to "mute" it.

It should appear gray:



If you want to do a classic render again, you'll have to mute the two nodes we've made, unmute the Render Layers and link this last one to the Composite.

We also need to change the resolution of the render so it matches the texture resolution.

Go into the Output Properties and change the resolution to 4096x4096:



Finally, render with F12.

This operation shouldn't take too long and you should see a beautiful render with the right colors and no noise on it:



With the render window open and while hovering it, press ALT + S to save it.

Change the File Format to JPEG, lower the quality a little (75% should be enough) and name it baked.jpg:



Save it where you want. We are going to use it later in Three.js.

Exporting the model 
02:08:04
We need to apply some modifications to the model in order to optimize it a bit more. But we are not going to do that now because we want to witness the issues when importing it into Three.js. This will help us understand better why we are doing these optimizations.

For now, let's simply export the whole scene.

Make all the collections selectable but not the others collection (even the emissions collection):



In Object Mode, select everything with A:



Now export as glTF 2.0:



Here are the exporting parameters:



Some more information:

Check Remember Export Settings, so you don't have to set those settings every time you want to export.
Use .glb because it's lighter, though it won't make a huge difference.
Export only the Selected Objects. We don't want to export the camera and the light.
Check +Y Up because the Y axis is going up on Three.js.
In the geometry, we only need the UVs. Remember that we just want to place the baked texture on it.
Activate the Compression. We are going to use Draco.
Deactivate everything related to the Animation because we have none.
Name your file portal.glb and put it with your baked.jpg file.

We now have both the baked.jpg file and the portal.glb files. In the next lesson, we are going to import them into Three.js as well as optimize the model a bit more.



In the previous lessons, we created and exported our scene.

We can now import it into Three.js, but we will also make sure to optimize our model as best as we possibly can.

Setup 
00:12
Currently, all we have in our scene is a white cube.

The loaders have already been added to the code, and Draco is already supported:

/**
 * Loaders
 */
// Texture loader
const textureLoader = new THREE.TextureLoader()

// Draco loader
const dracoLoader = new DRACOLoader()
dracoLoader.setDecoderPath('draco/')

// GLTF loader
const gltfLoader = new GLTFLoader()
gltfLoader.setDRACOLoader(dracoLoader)
The portal.glb and baked.jpg files are located in the /static/ folder but you can replace them with your own files.

An instance of lil-gui is also available, and we are going to add some tweaks to it in the next lesson.

The antialias is already set on the WebGLRenderer.

Loading the model 
01:46
We can start by loading the model. We are going to keep the cube in the scene to make sure that everything is working. Once we can see our portal scene, we will get rid of the cube.

Load the model after the loaders part and test the result in the console:

/**
 * Model
 */
gltfLoader.load(
    'portal.glb',
    (gltf) =>
    {
        console.log(gltf.scene)
    }
)
If you don't get the scene in the console log, check the path and search for errors.

We will now try to add the model to the scene:

gltfLoader.load(
    'portal.glb',
    (gltf) =>
    {
        scene.add(gltf.scene)
    }
)


You should see some silhouettes.

The problem is that, by default, when GLTF exports PBR materials, they get interpreted as MeshStandardMaterial. And, this material needs light.

But we don't want lights because our scene is baked, and all the lighting and shadow information is already contained in the texture:



So, we are going to create a MeshBasicMaterial and apply it to all the elements in the scene.

Since we are going to create multiple materials, we need to create a section for them in the code before loading the model:

/**
 * Materials
 */
// Baked material
const bakedMaterial = new THREE.MeshBasicMaterial({ color: 0xff0000 })
There are a lot of objects in the scene. Instead of applying the material to each one manually, we can traverse the scene in the load callback:

gltfLoader.load(
    'portal.glb',
    (gltf) =>
    {
        gltf.scene.traverse((child) =>
        {
            child.material = bakedMaterial
        })
        scene.add(gltf.scene)
    }
)


You should get all the objects visible with a uniform red color.

Now, remove the code related to the white cube.



Loading the texture 
08:47
To load the texture, we can use the textureLoader already in the code.

Load it before the materials:

/**
 * Textures
 */
const bakedTexture = textureLoader.load('baked.jpg')
Make sure you don't get any error in the logs.

To apply this texture to our scene, we can add it to the bakedMaterial with the map property:

const bakedMaterial = new THREE.MeshBasicMaterial({ map: bakedTexture })


While this looks interesting and funny, this is not what we want.

The problem is that our texture Y coordinates are inverted. It's as if our texture has been mirrored vertically.

There is a disagreement between software / library about the direction of the Y axis in the texture's coordinates. We were unlucky in the illustration above, but all we need to do is flip the texture.

To do that, set the flipY property of bakedTexture to false:

bakedTexture.flipY = false


The scene looks better now.

We still need to take care of the pole lights and the portal. And the colors look washed out compared to the Blender render.

Fixing the colors 
12:39
Our baked texture is encoded with sRGB but Three.js isn't aware of that.

To set the encoding of the texture, change its colorSpace property to THREE.SRGBColorSpace:

bakedTexture.colorSpace = THREE.SRGBColorSpace


The colors are now exactly the same as in the Blender render.

Fixing the emission objects 
14:29
It's time to fix the pole lights and the portal.

Because they are emission materials, they should look like uniform bright colors which is why we can use MeshBasicMaterial.

Create a MeshBasicMaterial for the pole light:

// Pole light material
const poleLightMaterial = new THREE.MeshBasicMaterial({ color: 0xffffe5 })
Now the question is, how can we apply that material to the right objects in the scene.

If you log the children of the scene in the load callback, you'll see that there are 56 Meshes in it (this number might vary depending on your model):

gltfLoader.load(
    'portal.glb',
    (gltf) =>
    {
        console.log(gltf.scene.children)
        
        // ...
    }
)
To solve how to apply the right material to the right object, we are going to edit the model and set a specific name for each emission object.

Open the model in Blender (use your .blend file or use the file located in the /resources/ folder):



Enable selection on the emissions collection (if that's not already the case):



Rename each one of the objects accordingly:

poleLightA
poleLightB
portalLight


In Blender, you can't use the same name for multiple objects because they each have a unique ID.

Select everything (except the camera and the light) and export it as glTF 2.0:



Use the same parameters as in the previous lesson and replace the portal.glb file in the /static/ folder:



Spoiler alert, don't close Blender!

You can access object names in Three.js with the name property:

gltfLoader.load(
    'portal.glb',
    (gltf) =>
    {
        console.log(gltf.scene.children[0].name)

        // ...
    }
)
What we can do now, is search in the gltf.scene.children array by using the name property.

In JavaScript, you can "search" in an array with the find(...) method:

gltfLoader.load(
    'portal.glb',
    (gltf) =>
    {
        gltf.scene.traverse((child) =>
        {
            child.material = bakedMaterial
        })
        scene.add(gltf.scene)

        // Get each object
        const portalLightMesh = gltf.scene.children.find((child) => child.name === 'portalLight')
        const poleLightAMesh = gltf.scene.children.find((child) => child.name === 'poleLightA')
        const poleLightBMesh = gltf.scene.children.find((child) => child.name === 'poleLightB')

        console.log(portalLightMesh)
        console.log(poleLightAMesh)
        console.log(poleLightBMesh)
    }
)
You should see each one of the 3 objects in the console.

If you get an error or undefined, check the names in your JavaScript as well as in your Blender scene. Also, make sure you exported the model the right way.

We can now replace the pole lights with the material we created earlier:

gltfLoader.load(
    'portal.glb',
    (gltf) =>
    {
        gltf.scene.traverse((child) =>
        {
            child.material = bakedMaterial
        })
        scene.add(gltf.scene)

        // Get each object
        const portalLightMesh = gltf.scene.children.find((child) => child.name === 'portalLight')
        const poleLightAMesh = gltf.scene.children.find((child) => child.name === 'poleLightA')
        const poleLightBMesh = gltf.scene.children.find((child) => child.name === 'poleLightB')

        // Apply materials
        poleLightAMesh.material = poleLightMaterial
        poleLightBMesh.material = poleLightMaterial
    }
)


You should see your MeshBasicMaterial applied on both lamps.

Create a MeshBasicMaterial for the portal and apply it the same way:

// Portal light material
const portalLightMaterial = new THREE.MeshBasicMaterial({ color: 0xffffff })

// ...

gltfLoader.load(
    'portal.glb',
    (gltf) =>
    {
        gltf.scene.traverse((child) =>
        {
            child.material = bakedMaterial
        })
        scene.add(gltf.scene)

        // Get each object
        const portalLightMesh = gltf.scene.children.find((child) => child.name === 'portalLight')
        const poleLightAMesh = gltf.scene.children.find((child) => child.name === 'poleLightA')
        const poleLightBMesh = gltf.scene.children.find((child) => child.name === 'poleLightB')

        // Apply materials
        portalLightMesh.material = portalLightMaterial
        poleLightAMesh.material = poleLightMaterial
        poleLightBMesh.material = poleLightMaterial
    }
)


If you have a portal color different than white, don't spend too much time trying to find the right value because we are going to replace it with a ShaderMaterial later.

Improving performances 
29:48
We could stop here, but we have made some performance mistakes.

First, we can test the draw calls with Spector.js.

Monitoring
If you remember from the performance lesson, Spector.js is a Chrome plugin that let us see the different steps the GPU had to go through to create the render.

While this lesson is being written, the Chrome plugin isn't available anymore.

You don't need to install the plugin to follow the steps below, but it's always good to keep an eye on how your scene is being rendered in order to optimize it.

If you installed Spector.js in Chrome, hit the extension icon to activate it and hit it a second time to open the following menu:



Click the red circle to start processing the render. This might take few seconds.

Once processed, a window should open with all the details we need. On the left, you can scroll through the different steps taken to render the scene. The less you have, the better:



The performance is probably good enough, but if you think about it, we should only have 4 objects:

The first pole light
The second pole light
The portal light
All the baked objects
We don't need to separate the baked objects because we are pretty sure we are not going to move them. For example, if we moved the axe, we would still see its shadow on the trunk. If we moved a fence, we would still see its shadow on the floor.

To improve the performance, we are going to merge these geometries.

Merging the baked objects
Go back to Blender:



We don't want to affect the emissions objects. Make sure to set the emissions collection as un-selectable:



Merging all the geometries right now would be a bad idea because we might not be able to modify our scene after that. We are going to duplicate them first and put everything in a different collection before merging.

Create an empty merged collection:



Select all the objects in the scene (not the camera, the light and the emission objects) and duplicate them with SHIFT + D. Validate the duplicate by clicking once on the scene (without moving the mouse).

While those duplicates objects are still selected, move them to the merged collection by pressing M:



All the objects are now duplicated in the merged collection. You can merge them by pressing CTRL + J on Windows or CMD + J on MacOS.

Deactivate all the other collections and check that you have only one merged object:



Change the name of this single object to baked:



Reactivate the emissions collection in order to be able to select the objects inside.

You should keep the initial collections that you made, even if they are deactivated. They will be there in case we need to make changes or to re-bake the scene:



If you switch to Renderer shading, you'll see that the materials are still working on the merged object.

This is because Blender can handle multiple materials on one geometry. It's not a problem because, when exporting, we ask Blender not to export the material. But if you are curious to see what your scene looks like without materials, go to the Materials Properties tab while selecting the baked object and delete all the materials by clicking on the - icon:



This should result in a nice looking white scene.



We can now export the merged object and the emissions with the same parameters as before:



You should get the exact same result in Three.js:



But let's look at Spector.js:



As you can see, our scene is being drawn in only 4 steps. One for the baked object and one for each emission light.

We could have merged the two pole lights, but that's more than enough for now.

Now that we have only one object on which we want to apply the baked texture, we don't need to traverse all the children of the loaded scene.

We can search for it using the same method as for the emission objects:

gltfLoader.load(
    'portal.glb',
    (gltf) =>
    {
        scene.add(gltf.scene)

        // Get each object
        const bakedMesh = gltf.scene.children.find((child) => child.name === 'baked')
        const portalLightMesh = gltf.scene.children.find((child) => child.name === 'portalLight')
        const poleLightAMesh = gltf.scene.children.find((child) => child.name === 'poleLightA')
        const poleLightBMesh = gltf.scene.children.find((child) => child.name === 'poleLightB')

        // Apply materials
        bakedMesh.material = bakedMaterial
        portalLightMesh.material = portalLightMaterial
        poleLightAMesh.material = poleLightMaterial
        poleLightBMesh.material = poleLightMaterial
    }
)


You should get the same result. If not, make sure you changed the name of the merged object to baked and that you exported it with the 3 emissions objects.

In the next lesson, we are going to add some details to the scene.



Our scene is looking great with the baked texture, but we are not really using the full potential of WebGL. Let's add more details and give more life to the scene.

First, we are going to add fireflies floating around. Then, we are going to create a cool animation inside the portal. But first, we need to change that black background.

Setup 
00:45
The code is exactly the same as we left it in the previous lesson.

We have our scene already imported in Three.js, we can rotate around with the OrbitControls and we have our lil-gui instance ready.



Background color 
01:14
For the background, we are not going to make something too fancy. We will simply change the color to something that matches our scene a bit more. To find the perfect color, we are going to add a tweak to lil-gui.

Right before creating our lil-gui instance, add a debugObject:

// Debug
const debugObject = {}
const gui = new GUI({
    width: 400
})
Like we did in the previous lessons, this object's purpose is only to store the color as a property so that we can add it as a tweak to lil-gui.

After instancing the renderer, add a clearColor property to the debugObject object:

// Clear color
debugObject.clearColor = '#ff0000'
Then add it to the tweaks of lil-gui using gui.addColor(...):

gui.addColor(debugObject, 'clearColor')


You should see the color tweak but we are not using it yet.

Use the value to change the background color with renderer.setClearColor(...):

debugObject.clearColor = '#ff0000'
renderer.setClearColor(debugObject.clearColor)
gui.addColor(debugObject, 'clearColor')


Unfortunately, changing the tweak won't change the color of the background because we are only changing the clearColor property.

We need to call the renderer.setClearColor(...) again when the tweak changes:

gui
    .addColor(debugObject, 'clearColor')
    .onChange(() =>
    {
        renderer.setClearColor(debugObject.clearColor)
    })
You can now find the color that matches your scene the best:

debugObject.clearColor = '#201919'


Fireflies 
05:16
To create the fireflies, we are going to use particles with a custom geometry.

Base
Start by creating an empty BufferGeometry:

/**
 * Fireflies
 */
// Geometry
const firefliesGeometry = new THREE.BufferGeometry()
Create a BufferAttribute named position to set the position of each particle:

const firefliesGeometry = new THREE.BufferGeometry()
const firefliesCount = 30
const positionArray = new Float32Array(firefliesCount * 3)

for(let i = 0; i < firefliesCount; i++)
{
    positionArray[i * 3 + 0] = Math.random() * 4
    positionArray[i * 3 + 1] = Math.random() * 4
    positionArray[i * 3 + 2] = Math.random() * 4
}

firefliesGeometry.setAttribute('position', new THREE.BufferAttribute(positionArray, 3))
The positions of the fireflies are random, but we will improve their positions once we can see the fireflies.

We are going to use a PointsMaterial in order to see our fireflies, but we will change it to a custom ShaderMaterial later:

Create a PointsMaterial with a size of 0.1 and set the sizeAttenuation to true:

// Material
const firefliesMaterial = new THREE.PointsMaterial({ size: 0.1, sizeAttenuation: true })
Finally, create the Points instance using the firefliesGeometry and the firefliesMaterial and add it to the scene:

// Points
const fireflies = new THREE.Points(firefliesGeometry, firefliesMaterial)
scene.add(fireflies)
You should see some big square particles.

Let's change the positions so that it fits in the scene:

for(let i = 0; i < firefliesCount; i++)
{
    positionArray[i * 3 + 0] = (Math.random() - 0.5) * 4
    positionArray[i * 3 + 1] = Math.random() * 1.5
    positionArray[i * 3 + 2] = (Math.random() - 0.5) * 4
}


The particles shouldn't go too far on the x and z axes and stay above the floor on the y axis.

Custom shader material
We can now change the material to a ShaderMaterial in order to animate them but also draw something other than those ugly squares.

In the /src/ folder, create a shaders/ folder.
In that shaders/ folder, create a fireflies/ folder.
In that fireflies/ folder (hang on), create a vertex.glsl and a fragment.glsl file.
You can try to write those shaders on your own.

Here's the code for /src/shaders/fireflies/vertex.glsl:

void main()
{
    vec4 modelPosition = modelMatrix * vec4(position, 1.0);
    vec4 viewPosition = viewMatrix * modelPosition;
    vec4 projectionPosition = projectionMatrix * viewPosition;

    gl_Position = projectionPosition;
    gl_PointSize = 40.0;
}
This code isn't doing anything special. The vertex get positioned where it should be by applying the various matrices. We also added the gl_PointSize to control the size of the particles.

Here's the code for /src/shaders/fireflies/fragment.glsl:

void main()
{
    gl_FragColor = vec4(1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0);
}
As with the vertex shader, this code isn't doing anything special and the particles should look red.

We can now import those shaders into our script:

import firefliesVertexShader from './shaders/fireflies/vertex.glsl'
import firefliesFragmentShader from './shaders/fireflies/fragment.glsl'
The rule to load .glsl files has already been added to the Vite configuration. firefliesVertexShader and firefliesFragmentShader should contain the two shaders we wrote.

Replace the PointsMaterial by a ShaderMaterial with the vertexShader and fragmentShader properties:

const firefliesMaterial = new THREE.ShaderMaterial({
    vertexShader: firefliesVertexShader,
    fragmentShader: firefliesFragmentShader
})


You should get red squares as the fireflies.

Point size
Those squares might look bigger on your screen and this is due to the pixel ratio. In our vertex shader, we wrote gl_PointSize = 40.0; which means that each particle will take 40 pixels of the render in width and height, but if you have a high pixel ratio screen, 40 pixels will look smaller because you have more pixels in the same space.

To fix that, we can send the pixel ratio as a uniform:

// Material
const firefliesMaterial = new THREE.ShaderMaterial({
    uniforms:
    {
        uPixelRatio: { value: Math.min(window.devicePixelRatio, 2) }
    },
    vertexShader: firefliesVertexShader,
    fragmentShader: firefliesFragmentShader
})
We are not using renderer.getPixelRatio() because the renderer is being declared afterwards. Doing it this way would result in an error. But if you prefer, you can move the entire fireflies code to after the renderer.

We can now retrieve the uPixelRatio uniform in the vertex shader and multiply our gl_PointSize by it:

uniform float uPixelRatio;

void main()
{
    // ...

    gl_PointSize = 40.0 * uPixelRatio;
}


You should now see the same particle size regardless of the pixel ratio of the screen.

We might have a problem if the user changes the window from one screen to another one with a different pixel ratio. Fortunately, most of the time, when a user does that, he is also resizing the window so that it fits better. This is why we can simply update the uniform in the resize callback function:

window.addEventListener('resize', () =>
{
    // ...

    // Update fireflies
    firefliesMaterial.uniforms.uPixelRatio.value = Math.min(window.devicePixelRatio, 2)
})
Another problem with our particles is that the size of the squares is the same regardless of the distance. We need to activate the size attenuation and we can do that with the following code:

// ...

void main()
{
    // ...
    
    gl_PointSize = 40.0 * uPixelRatio;
    gl_PointSize *= (1.0 / - viewPosition.z);
}
The particles' size should now depend on the distance to the camera.

Finally, we can create a uSize uniform to control the size of the particles:

const firefliesMaterial = new THREE.ShaderMaterial({
    uniforms:
    {
        uPixelRatio: { value: Math.min(window.devicePixelRatio, 2) },
        uSize: { value: 100 }
    },
    // ...
})
Use it in the shader:

// ...
uniform float uSize;

void main()
{
    // ...
    
    gl_PointSize = uSize * uPixelRatio;
    // ...
}
And add a tweak to control it:

gui.add(firefliesMaterial.uniforms.uSize, 'value').min(0).max(500).step(1).name('firefliesSize')
Firefly pattern
It's time to change those red squares into better looking fireflies. We are going to create some shiny points to represent them.

We could have used a texture and it's actually more performant to do that. But, for the sake of this lesson and to have more control over the pattern, we are going to draw it in the fragment shader.

Increase the particle size to something like 200. Start by showing the UV coordinates of the point with gl_PointCoord:

void main()
{
    gl_FragColor = vec4(gl_PointCoord, 1.0, 1.0);
}


We are going to use these coordinates to draw a shiny point at each center.

First, we know that we need to play with the value which contains the distance to the center of the coordinates.

Create a distanceToCenter variable and calculate the distance between the center (vec2(0.5)) and gl_PointCoord:

void main()
{
    float distanceToCenter = distance(gl_PointCoord, vec2(0.5));
    gl_FragColor = vec4(gl_PointCoord, 1.0, 1.0);
}
Use this distanceToCenter variable as the alpha of gl_FragColor:

void main()
{
    float distanceToCenter = distance(gl_PointCoord, vec2(0.5));

    gl_FragColor = vec4(1.0, 1.0, 1.0, distanceToCenter);
}
The particles are all white even though the alpha was supposed to change. This is because we forgot to set the transparent property of the material to true:

const firefliesMaterial = new THREE.ShaderMaterial({
    transparent: true,
    // ...
})


We can now see our pattern through the alpha.

Next, we will try to create a shiny pattern. To do that, we can start with a very small value and divide it by the distanceToCenter.

Create a strength variable, divide 0.05 by distanceToCenter and send it to the gl_FragColor:

void main()
{
    float distanceToCenter = distance(gl_PointCoord, vec2(0.5));
    float strength = 0.05 / distanceToCenter;

    gl_FragColor = vec4(1.0, 1.0, 1.0, strength);
}


They look good, but unfortunately, we can see the edges. This is because this formula gets very low with distance but never reaches 0:



To fix that, we can subtract a small value but big enough to make sure that the result goes below 0.0 before reaching the edges:

void main()
{
    float distanceToCenter = distance(gl_PointCoord, vec2(0.5));
    float strength = 0.05 / distanceToCenter - 0.1;

    gl_FragColor = vec4(1.0, 1.0, 1.0, strength);
}




The fireflies now look like little points of light.

Scale randomness
When creating something organic, it's always good to add randomness. So far, all the fireflies have the same size.

We are going to send a different scale multiplier to each one.

Create an aScale attribute and fill it with random values using Math.random(). We only need 1 value per vertex, so make sure to get the Float32Array length right and also set the second parameter of the BufferAttribute to 1:

const scaleArray = new Float32Array(firefliesCount)

for(let i = 0; i < firefliesCount; i++)
{
    // ...

    scaleArray[i] = Math.random()
}

// ...
firefliesGeometry.setAttribute('aScale', new THREE.BufferAttribute(scaleArray, 1))
We can retrieve the attribute in the vertex shader and use it in the gl_PointSize formula:

// ...

attribute float aScale;

void main()
{
    // ...
    
    gl_PointSize = uSize * aScale * uPixelRatio;
    gl_PointSize *= (1.0 / - viewPosition.z);
}


The fireflies now have different sizes.

Blending
To make them even more shiny and look like points made from light, set the blending property of the material to THREE.AdditiveBlending:

const firefliesMaterial = new THREE.ShaderMaterial({
    blending: THREE.AdditiveBlending,
    // ...
})


Depth write
At some specific angles, you will notice some clipping issues where one particle seems to hide the one behind. This is true even if the alpha is supposed to be set at a low value.



To fix that, we can deactivate depth writing by setting the depthWrite property to false on the material:

const firefliesMaterial = new THREE.ShaderMaterial({
    depthWrite: false,
    // ...
})
Floating animation
Finally, we want the fireflies to float up and down to give them more life.

Because we are going to do the animation in the vertex shader, we need to send it the time.

Create a uTime uniform and update it in the tick function by using the elapsedTime variable:

const firefliesMaterial = new THREE.ShaderMaterial({
    // ...
    uniforms:
    {
        uTime: { value: 0 },
        // ...
    },
    // ...
})

// ...
const clock = new THREE.Clock()

const tick = () =>
{
    const elapsedTime = clock.getElapsedTime()

    // Update materials
    firefliesMaterial.uniforms.uTime.value = elapsedTime

    // ...
}
Retrieve the uTime uniform in the vertex shader and update the modelPosition.y using sin():

uniform float uTime;

// ...

void main()
{
    vec4 modelPosition = modelMatrix * vec4(position, 1.0);
    modelPosition.y += sin(uTime);

    // ...
}
That's a good start but we need to add some randomness. First, let's de-synchronize them.

We could have sent a new attribute, but instead (since they only move on the y axis), we can use the x axis to offset the value in sin():

// ...

void main()
{
    // ...
    modelPosition.y += sin(uTime + modelPosition.x * 100.0);

    // ...
}
The animation looks more random, but we also need to randomize and reduce the amplitude.

We can use the aScale so that the smallest fireflies move less. We can also multiply by a small value to reduce the general amplitude:

// ...

void main()
{
    // ...
    modelPosition.y += sin(uTime + modelPosition.x * 100.0) * aScale * 0.2;

    // ...
}
That's it for the fireflies but you can go further by adding more tweaks to lil-gui, improving the pattern, or maybe sending a color using a uniform.

Portal 
54:22
The final piece of our scene is the portal. We are going to draw something that looks better than this uniform color.

Custom shader material
We can start by changing the portal material to a ShaderMaterial.

In the /src/shaders/ folder, create a portal/ folder.

In that portal/ folder, create a vertex.glsl file and a fragment.glsl file.

Again, you can try to write those basic vertex and fragment shaders on your own.

Here's the code for /src/shaders/portal/vertex.glsl:

void main()
{
    vec4 modelPosition = modelMatrix * vec4(position, 1.0);
    vec4 viewPosition = viewMatrix * modelPosition;
    vec4 projectionPosition = projectionMatrix * viewPosition;

    gl_Position = projectionPosition;
}
Here's the code for /src/shaders/portal/fragment.glsl:

void main()
{
    gl_FragColor = vec4(1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0);
}
We are placing the vertices where they are supposed to be and we are setting the color to a uniform red.

We can now import those shaders into our script:

import portalVertexShader from './shaders/portal/vertex.glsl'
import portalFragmentShader from './shaders/portal/fragment.glsl'
Replace the MeshBasicMaterial by a ShaderMaterial with the vertexShader and fragmentShader properties:

const portalLightMaterial = new THREE.ShaderMaterial({
    vertexShader: portalVertexShader,
    fragmentShader: portalFragmentShader
})


You should get a red portal which doesn't match the rest of the scene, but we are going to fix that.

As in the Shader Patterns lesson, we are going to use the UV coordinates to draw on the portal.

Send the UV coordinates from the vertex shader to the fragment shader using a vUv varying.

The vertex shader:

varying vec2 vUv;

void main()
{
    // ...

    vUv = uv;
}
The fragment shader:

varying vec2 vUv;

void main()
{
    gl_FragColor = vec4(vUv, 1.0, 1.0);
}


If you are using your own model and you don't get this gradient, it might be because your portal hasn't been unwrapped properly.

Fix the UV coordinates
To fix that, open your .blend file:



Select the portal only:



Go into Edit Mode, select all the faces and check how the UV is being unwrapped in the UV Editor:



Here, the unwrap is good, but you may have a different result or maybe nothing at all.

Don't worry about the baked texture in the background of the UV Editor. We don't need to be concerned with it. All we want to do is to unwrap the disc-shaped portal so that it fills the whole map.

To do that, while still in the UV Editor with all the faces selected, press U and choose Unwrap.

And that's all. We don't really care about the rotation of the UV because the pattern we are going to draw will be circular.

Leave the Edit Mode and select the merged object and all the emissions. Then, export everything as portal.glb into the /static/ folder:



Refresh your scene, and you should now have the same gradient:



If the gradient isn't oriented the same, it's not a problem. Our pattern will be circular.

Perlin
Now comes the fun part. You can draw anything you want in the portal, as long as you find the right formula.

The following steps lead straight to a pleasing result. But, obviously, it was a long process of trying many things until it ended up looking good. Do not be frustrated if it takes you hours when doing it on your own. It's all about time and practice.

We are going to start with a classic Perlin noise. In this example, we are going to use a 3D one, so we can animate the third value with the time in order to create variations to the noise.

Take the following function made by Stefan Gustavson, which is available in this gist, and add it to your src/shaders/portal/fragment.glsl file:

//	Classic Perlin 3D Noise 
//	by Stefan Gustavson
//
vec4 permute(vec4 x){ return mod(((x*34.0)+1.0)*x, 289.0); }
vec4 taylorInvSqrt(vec4 r){ return 1.79284291400159 - 0.85373472095314 * r; }
vec3 fade(vec3 t) { return t*t*t*(t*(t*6.0-15.0)+10.0); }

float cnoise(vec3 P)
{
    vec3 Pi0 = floor(P); // Integer part for indexing
    vec3 Pi1 = Pi0 + vec3(1.0); // Integer part + 1
    Pi0 = mod(Pi0, 289.0);
    Pi1 = mod(Pi1, 289.0);
    vec3 Pf0 = fract(P); // Fractional part for interpolation
    vec3 Pf1 = Pf0 - vec3(1.0); // Fractional part - 1.0
    vec4 ix = vec4(Pi0.x, Pi1.x, Pi0.x, Pi1.x);
    vec4 iy = vec4(Pi0.yy, Pi1.yy);
    vec4 iz0 = Pi0.zzzz;
    vec4 iz1 = Pi1.zzzz;

    vec4 ixy = permute(permute(ix) + iy);
    vec4 ixy0 = permute(ixy + iz0);
    vec4 ixy1 = permute(ixy + iz1);

    vec4 gx0 = ixy0 / 7.0;
    vec4 gy0 = fract(floor(gx0) / 7.0) - 0.5;
    gx0 = fract(gx0);
    vec4 gz0 = vec4(0.5) - abs(gx0) - abs(gy0);
    vec4 sz0 = step(gz0, vec4(0.0));
    gx0 -= sz0 * (step(0.0, gx0) - 0.5);
    gy0 -= sz0 * (step(0.0, gy0) - 0.5);

    vec4 gx1 = ixy1 / 7.0;
    vec4 gy1 = fract(floor(gx1) / 7.0) - 0.5;
    gx1 = fract(gx1);
    vec4 gz1 = vec4(0.5) - abs(gx1) - abs(gy1);
    vec4 sz1 = step(gz1, vec4(0.0));
    gx1 -= sz1 * (step(0.0, gx1) - 0.5);
    gy1 -= sz1 * (step(0.0, gy1) - 0.5);

    vec3 g000 = vec3(gx0.x,gy0.x,gz0.x);
    vec3 g100 = vec3(gx0.y,gy0.y,gz0.y);
    vec3 g010 = vec3(gx0.z,gy0.z,gz0.z);
    vec3 g110 = vec3(gx0.w,gy0.w,gz0.w);
    vec3 g001 = vec3(gx1.x,gy1.x,gz1.x);
    vec3 g101 = vec3(gx1.y,gy1.y,gz1.y);
    vec3 g011 = vec3(gx1.z,gy1.z,gz1.z);
    vec3 g111 = vec3(gx1.w,gy1.w,gz1.w);

    vec4 norm0 = taylorInvSqrt(vec4(dot(g000, g000), dot(g010, g010), dot(g100, g100), dot(g110, g110)));
    g000 *= norm0.x;
    g010 *= norm0.y;
    g100 *= norm0.z;
    g110 *= norm0.w;
    vec4 norm1 = taylorInvSqrt(vec4(dot(g001, g001), dot(g011, g011), dot(g101, g101), dot(g111, g111)));
    g001 *= norm1.x;
    g011 *= norm1.y;
    g101 *= norm1.z;
    g111 *= norm1.w;

    float n000 = dot(g000, Pf0);
    float n100 = dot(g100, vec3(Pf1.x, Pf0.yz));
    float n010 = dot(g010, vec3(Pf0.x, Pf1.y, Pf0.z));
    float n110 = dot(g110, vec3(Pf1.xy, Pf0.z));
    float n001 = dot(g001, vec3(Pf0.xy, Pf1.z));
    float n101 = dot(g101, vec3(Pf1.x, Pf0.y, Pf1.z));
    float n011 = dot(g011, vec3(Pf0.x, Pf1.yz));
    float n111 = dot(g111, Pf1);

    vec3 fade_xyz = fade(Pf0);
    vec4 n_z = mix(vec4(n000, n100, n010, n110), vec4(n001, n101, n011, n111), fade_xyz.z);
    vec2 n_yz = mix(n_z.xy, n_z.zw, fade_xyz.y);
    float n_xyz = mix(n_yz.x, n_yz.y, fade_xyz.x); 
    
    return 2.2 * n_xyz;
}
At the end of this process, we are going to display a mix between two colors, but for now, we are going to focus on just one variable.

Create a strength variable and use the cnoise function we just added.

This function needs a vec3 as parameter. For now, we will use the vUv as the x and y and we will use the time variable later for the z:

// ...

void main()
{
    float strength = cnoise(vec3(vUv * 5.0, 0.0));

    gl_FragColor = vec4(vUv, 1.0, 1.0);
}
If there is no error, send the strength to the gl_FragColor:

// ...

void main()
{
    float strength = cnoise(vec3(vUv * 5.0, 0.0));

    gl_FragColor = vec4(strength, strength, strength, 1.0);
}


That's a good start and we can see the Perlin noise.

In your JavaScript file, create a uTime uniform and update it in the tick function like we did with the fireflies:

const portalLightMaterial = new THREE.ShaderMaterial({
    uniforms:
    {
        uTime: { value: 0 }
    },
    // ...
})

// ...

const tick = () =>
{
    const elapsedTime = clock.getElapsedTime()

    // Update materials
    firefliesMaterial.uniforms.uTime.value = elapsedTime
    portalLightMaterial.uniforms.uTime.value = elapsedTime

    // ...
}

tick()
Retrieve it in the fragment shader and use it as the third value of the vec3 that we send to cnoise:

uniform float uTime;

// ...

void main()
{
    // Perlin noise
    float strength = cnoise(vec3(vUv * 5.0, uTime));

    gl_FragColor = vec4(strength, strength, strength, 1.0);
}
We are already getting some Stargate vibes.

This classic Perlin noise is good, but we can get something even better by displacing the UV coordinates. We are going to create new UV coordinates based on the initial ones, but we are going to offset the x and the y by using another Perlin noise:

// ...

void main()
{
    // Displace the UV
    vec2 displacedUv = vUv + cnoise(vec3(vUv * 5.0, uTime));

    // Perlin noise
    float strength = cnoise(vec3(displacedUv * 5.0, uTime));

    gl_FragColor = vec4(strength, strength, strength, 1.0);
}
The animation is great but a little too fast. In order to slow it down and get some organic randomness, multiply the uTime by small values that are different for displacedUv and for strength:

// ...

void main()
{
    // Displace the UV
    vec2 displacedUv = vUv + cnoise(vec3(vUv * 5.0, uTime * 0.1));

    // Perlin noise
    float strength = cnoise(vec3(displacedUv * 5.0, uTime * 0.2));

    gl_FragColor = vec4(strength, strength, strength, 1.0);
}
Outer glow
We are on the right path, but the main concern now is the junction between the portal itself and the bricks around it. The junction between them should be totally white.

We need to create an outer glow. To do that, we start by finding the distance to the center and displaying the result in the gl_FragColor:

// ...

void main()
{
    // ...

    // Outer glow
    float outerGlow = distance(vUv, vec2(0.5));

    gl_FragColor = vec4(outerGlow, outerGlow, outerGlow, 1.0);
}


The gradient is the one we want, but we need to push the value at the edges in order to make sure that the gradient is totally white when we reach those edges. To do that, multiply and offset the value until you are satisfied:

// ...

void main()
{
    // ...

    // Outer glow
    float outerGlow = distance(vUv, vec2(0.5)) * 5.0 - 1.4;

    gl_FragColor = vec4(outerGlow, outerGlow, outerGlow, 1.0);
}


We can now add the outerGlow to the strength and send the strength to the gl_FragColor:

// ...

void main()
{
    // ...

    // Outer glow
    float outerGlow = distance(vUv, vec2(0.5)) * 5.0 - 1.4;
    strength += outerGlow;

    gl_FragColor = vec4(strength, strength, strength, 1.0);
}
We kind of get the result we want, but unfortunately, the edges aren't perfectly white. This is because the Perlin noise isn't clamped between 0.0 to 1.0. That means the value can actually go below -1.0 and above +1.0 . But, we aren't going to do anything about it because the next step will fix it.



Currently, we have a very smooth pattern, but it's actually too smooth. We want to add some sharpness to it.

Step
To do that, we can apply a step() function to the strength.

The first parameter of the step() function is a limit (also called edge). When the value of the second parameter is above this limit, you'll get 1.0 and if the value is below this limit, you'll get 0.0.

You can try different values for this limit:

// ...

void main()
{
    // ...

    // Apply cool step
    strength = step(- 0.2, strength);

    gl_FragColor = vec4(strength, strength, strength, 1.0);
}
We get a nice sharp result, but now it's too sharp.

Instead of replacing the strength with that step() function, we are going to add it to the initial strength. We can also multiply it by a lower value to dim the step effect a little:

// ...

void main()
{
    // ...

    // Apply cool step
    strength += step(- 0.2, strength) * 0.8;

    gl_FragColor = vec4(strength, strength, strength, 1.0);
}
And here is our final pattern. As you can see, the edges are perfectly white and we get a good mix between smooth and sharp.

Colors
In this example, we are fine with the black and white result because our portal light was initially white. But, let's add colors in case you went for a different portal color.

In the JavaScript file, add a uColorStart and a uColorEnd uniform with red and blue colors . Use the Color class:

const portalLightMaterial = new THREE.ShaderMaterial({
    uniforms:
    {
        uTime: { value: 0 },
        uColorStart: { value: new THREE.Color(0xff0000) },
        uColorEnd: { value: new THREE.Color(0x0000ff) }
    },
    // ...
})
Retrieve those uniform in the fragment shader, mix() them into a color variable using the strength and send it to the gl_FragColor:

uniform float uTime;
uniform vec3 uColorStart;
uniform vec3 uColorEnd;

// ...

void main()
{
    // ...

    // Final color
    vec3 color = mix(uColorStart, uColorEnd, strength);

    gl_FragColor = vec4(color, 1.0);
}


You should get a nice mix between the red and blue.

Let's add those colors to our lil-gui. As always, we add them as properties of the debugObject and listen to changes to update the uniforms accordingly:

debugObject.portalColorStart = '#ff0000'
debugObject.portalColorEnd = '#0000ff'

gui
    .addColor(debugObject, 'portalColorStart')
    .onChange(() =>
    {
        portalLightMaterial.uniforms.uColorStart.value.set(debugObject.portalColorStart)
    })
    
gui
    .addColor(debugObject, 'portalColorEnd')
    .onChange(() =>
    {
        portalLightMaterial.uniforms.uColorEnd.value.set(debugObject.portalColorEnd)
    })
You can now tweak the colors.

But there is a catch. With some colors like deep blue to orange, you'll notice that you end up with yellow on the edges and we also lose the sharpness we had before:



This is because the strength is actually going below 0.0 and above 1.0 which results on the colors being extrapolated. It's not much of a problem with black and white, but it gets messy with some other colors.

To fix that, we need to make sure that the value is clamped between 0.0 and 1.0 by using the clamp(...) function:

void main()
{
    // ...

    // Clamp the value
    strength = clamp(strength, 0.0, 1.0);

    // ...
}
Anyway, if you are using the model from the starter, you should probably stick with black and white.

Don't forget to use the debugObject.portalColorStart and debugObject.portalColorEnd in the initial values of the uniforms:

debugObject.portalColorStart = '#000000'
debugObject.portalColorEnd = '#ffffff'

// ...
    
const portalLightMaterial = new THREE.ShaderMaterial({
    uniforms:
    {
        uColorStart: { value: new THREE.Color(debugObject.portalColorStart) },
        uColorEnd: { value: new THREE.Color(debugObject.portalColorEnd) },
        // ...
    },
    // ...
})
Go further 
01:33:31
That's it for our portal scene. Now would be a good time to add more tweaks and maybe more details.

You can obviously try to create your own scene from scratch using all the modeling and baking processes you have learnt. Take your time, make sure to have the proper geometries, and clean UV coordinates. Don't hesitate to share your result on Twitter or in the Discord server.


